---
title: "Music and Science"
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - science
  - philosophy
  - music
---

Not a single day passes where I don’t listen to music. Punk, hardcore, indie, post-hardcore, metalcore, dream pop, black metal, jangle pop, emo, synth pop, skramz. All of them.

Rise Against are the band that started it all for me. They got me into punk and hardcore, and then music took a life of it its own inside of me. But I’m not here to write about punk and hardcore (though I might at some point). No, instead, I want to write about some bands and songs that are powerful critiques of science.

We have all been taught that science is this objective process to study the world through observations and experiments. We are taught that the so-called ‘hard’ sciences (mathematics, physics, chemistry, and biology) are objective and strong and good while the ‘soft’ sciences (humanities, social sciences) are subjective and weak and bad. Not only is this hard-soft distinction complete nonsense, but without those ‘soft’ sciences we cannot fully understand the ‘hard’ sciences. We are neer taught the history of our various fields of science, with most either never learning or being left to learn on their own. How can we do new research if we don’t even know the basic history of science? Here is where I think music can be a powerful tool, particularly to critique contemporary science.

Let’s start with this assumption of objectivity for the hard sciences, and I’ll begin with a quick spoiler: there is no such thing as objectivity. We are all humyn. We all have our own biases. While the data we collect might be objective, there were countless steps to reach that point that were influenced by subjective forces. 

- Which research provided the foundation for this study?
- Were those researchers predominantly white, cis-het men?
- Why did you test that specific hypothesis?
- Would a person with different intersectional identities and experiences have asked the same question?
- Why did you use that study system?
- Why did you clean your data in that manner?
- Why did you conduct that specific statistical test? 

Every single one of these questions on that non-exhaustive list is subjective to some degree, so it simply is not possible to have an objective output with many subjective inputs required to generate it. Now that we have gotten the nonsense of objectivity out of the way, let’s look at what different artists have to say about science and the scientific process.





Artist = Becoming the Archetype\
Song = Dichotomy

“In this hour the tower shall fall\
Initially the rationalized with futile speculations\
Which brought about their ultimately fatal calculations\
They sewed their own eyes shut\
To protect them from the light\
Closed the doorway of their minds\
Barred and sealed it shut

Their foolish hearts were darkened\
Their vacant minds deceived\
The lies that they exchanged for truth\
Became all that they believed\
They exchanged the incorruptible\
For the image of fallen man\
Worshiped creature rather than Creator\
The image rather than his hand

The heavens wait in silence\
For the coming of the end\
As man perfects his own imperfection\
Destruction closes in

In the grave they chose to make their beds\
Now all that they’ve created\
Comes crashing down\
Down\
Down upon their heads\
Death is waiting

In this hour the tower shall fall!”

When I listen to the song, I think of the assumption that science alone can fix all of our problems. I think of how we only let certain philosophy ‘count’ as ‘science’. We will almost blindly accept ideas by white men, but we don’t accept indigenous science. We don’t acknowledge that there were Muslim scholars going back to the 8th century with evolutionary theories. We filter what ideas are allowed to be considered science, closing our minds that we might not be as smart or as unique as we like to think we are. We do know something, but there is a lot of scientific knowledge to be shared and learned that shouldn’t be dismissed because it doesn’t meet our arbitrary (and ever-changing) definition of ‘science’.

When I listen to this song, I also think of how some evolutionary biologists and the charlatans in behavioural genetics suggest that some new polygenic score in the latest GWAS will finally help us solve societal inequities, as if those in the social sciences haven’t been telling us for decades what needs to be done within neoliberal society. But above all else, I think of how science tries to strip many of their humanity, ethics, and faith in order to participate in science. Morality cannot be quantified by numbers alone. 





Artist: Rise Against\
Song: Collapse (Post-Amerika)

“When our rivers run dry and our crops cease to grow\
When our summers grow longer and winters won't snow\
From the banks of the ocean and the ice in the hills\
To the fight in the desert where progress stands still\
When we've lost our will

That's how we'll know\
This is not a test\
This is cardiac arrest\
Of a world too proud to admit our mistakes\
We're crashing into the ground as we all fall from grace

When the air that we breathe becomes air that we choke\
When the marsh fever spreads from the swamps to our homes\
When your home on the range has been torn down and paved\
And the buffalo roam to a slaughterhouse grave\
What more will it take

For us to know\
This is not a test\
This is cardiac arrest\
Of a world too proud to admit our mistakes\
Kissing the ground as we all fall from grace

This is a chance to set things straight\
To bend or break the rules back into place\
There is no middle ground, no compromise\
We've drawn the line\
With perfect aim, we stand back and throw\
Glass windows break and it's all about to blow\
Lights go out as we pass the torch again\
In hope that it stays lit

Neutrality means that you don't really care\
Because the struggle goes on even when you're not there\
Blind and unaware

That's how we'll know\
This is not a test\
This is cardiac arrest\
Of a world too proud to admit our mistakes\
We're crashing into the ground as we all we all, all fall from grace”

This is one of my favourite songs. For me, I think this song is a great motivator for scientists to drop the pretense of ‘neutrality’ and ‘let’s stick to the science’ because your neutrality means you don’t really care. There is more than enough evidence of biodiversity loss and how that affects communities and ecosystems. Are you telling me that doesn’t inform your research? If it informs your scientific research, why doesn’t it inform your personal and public life? We do not exist in vacuums from the problems we study.

We need activists if we actually want to conserve the planet. We need to be more involved if we want to protect the environment and our fellow humyn beings. If we actually want to see progress, we need to get off the desk chair, out of the lab, and onto the picket line. We need direct action. Voting is only one tool, and when those institutions fail we need more allies and accomplices. Use your power to affect positive change in whatever ways you can.





Artist: capacities\
Song: Academic Flexing

“There is value in our every day experience that far exceeds\
expensive condescension. While they theorize in comfort\
study the words of the text that's assigned that offer no practical\
application. Dying to prove how fast they outgrow their own ideals\
while the rest of us take comfort in the substance of the real world”

As the name suggests, this song is a critique of academia. I’ve worked a fair few jobs so far in my life. During high school, I was a bagger and cashier at a grocery store. In undergrad, I worked 2-3 jobs: meter maid/parking garage attendant, lab manager, and football gameday parking (in the fall at UGA). I also did field sampling for a graduate student while working those other jobs and doing my own research. Between undergrad and coming to the University of Toronto, I waited tables at an Italian restaurant. In all of those jobs, I gained a lot of invaluable experience and skills. I worked with a lot of great people, and many of them never set foot in a college classroom. The idea that academia can be elitist is very true. The atmosphere can be overwhelming and intimidating to those who are first generation students or don’t reflect who the system was designed to serve (white, cis-het men). Academia doesn’t make us better than anyone. And in some cases, academia certainly makes us worse.

If you are still reading, thank you kindly. I guess my main point is that music is wonderful and it can help us process and critique the events and institutions in our daily lives.
